---
layout: post
title:  "Competing stakeholder interests in the process of EHR creation and implementation: how can we move forward?"
date:   2019-05-19
author: Kathleen
categories: reactions
---

As I did research on the various stakeholders and processes involved in implementing EHR systems in the US, I found that there was relatively little peer-reviewed literature on the subject--or at least none that was easily obtainable through searches in PubMed or Google Scholar. This encouraged me to dive in a little more to the blog and news pieces out there for context, and in doing so I discovered that the many different stakeholders involved have very different views on what should be changed about the process in order to achieve better clinical and financial outcomes at health care sites. The apparent sparsity of EHR-related journal articles also makes me realize just how young this technology is, assuming that part of the reason EHR implementation research is so limited is that EHR use has only very recently become a standard practice in medicine, much less an active area of academic research. Basically, to me this whole system is somewhat reminicsent of a fledgling startup company in which the product was half-baked before the first release, and every single person in the company has completely different priorities and different visions of how the company should operate. I also have zero experience in the startup world so take that analogy with a grain of salt, but it helps me visualize the disjointedness of the EHR implementation process, and even start to envision ways in which we can start changing the process for the better. It would be wonderful to artificially craft some new stakeholder into the process--let's call it "the synthesizer"--that helps ensure that the varous stakeholders are in constant, productive communication with each other and that their interest become symbiotic. How would this actually work? No clue, but let's start brainstorming!
