---
layout: post
title:  "HIE and Security"
date:   2019-06-09
author: Harsh
categories: reactions
---
I was initially going to write two separate posts for HIE and security, but after thinking about the architecture requirements and the current implementations of HIE (e.g. [Washington's OneHealthPort](https://www.onehealthport.com/sites/default/files/content-uploads/documents/NCPDP%2010.6%20IG%20March%202018-v1_2.pdf)), I thought it would be appropriate to discuss both sections together. The idea of a Health Information Exchange has been around for a long time, with systems dating back to the 1990s with the  Community Health Information Management System (CHMIS) formed by the Hartford Foundation. However, with early systems, either the technology was not advanced enough to support the needs of the exchange and its members or privacy / security regulation was not developed enough to allow for standardized communication. With the advances in technology and better standards for secure healthcare information transfer (e.g. FHIR with Auth 2.0), perhaps the stage is set for a proper health information exchange. 

In the ideal setting, providers would be able to share and retrieve patient information automatically and in real time (both key factors for success). A modern health information exchange would have to be automated, as to not put more load onto the nurse and provider workflows, and real time (as speed of transfer is critical when working with sensitive data and complicated health conditions). If both were to be achieved, we would be able to connect providers with each other, their patients, hospitals, the public health department, the CDC, governmental agencies, insurance companies, and others in the healthcare network. However, when envisioning this sort of information network, the privacy and security of the patients and their data will have to be carefully maintained. New advances in rapid de identification, secure data storage and transfer, training in electronic systems, and better documentation will have to be made before that dream is achieved. If any cog in this system is faulty, the entire system faces risk of data breach, network delay and outage (which could lead to loss of life depending on the setting), and lack of trust being formed in the general public and in providers.

Briefly on security, I think the biggest threat to data is the human element, which historically has proven to be more error prone than computerized systems. Although most healthcare individuals receive training during onboarding or once annually, I think security training should happen more frequently or involve some sort of examination that will highlight the gravity of health information falling into the wrong hands. Phishing attacks and accidents due to overworked healthcare providers allow malicious intent to easily slip into the cracks of the system. It is up to us, and the future generation, to acknowledge these holes and work together to patch it up.

Lastly, I do not think I have the most complete knowledge on the actual standards and technologies already in place for HIE and security. I look forward to reading more about these topics and perhaps take related courses if available at UW.

