---
layout: post
title:  "The darker side of HIE (or lack thereof)"
date:   2019-06-10
author: Kathleen
categories: reactions
---

As we worked our way through the Health Information Exchange module of the course, I often found myself wondering why HIE hadn’t become an absolute given in healthcare yet. I initially thought that interoperability issues between different information systems were the primary culprit for the delay in implementing functional HIE protocols, but I’m getting the sense that we’ve already fleshed out many of these issues (given that many functional information exchange systems exist between seemingly incompatible platforms), and that the technical difficulties of HIE have almost become a cover for some of the darker disincentives for sharing health information.

I recently had an eye-opening experience with the current state of HIE while visiting a clinic associated with a major Seattle-based healthcare organization. I was first surprised to learn that my health records could not be accessed by the clinic, even though the clinic uses the exact same EHR system as the Bay Area-based healthcare organization I am currently a member of. The intake nurse collected a brief medical history, after which the physician attempted to prescribe me a medication that I had mentioned I was allergic to just moments before with the nurse. After receiving a prescription for a safer medication, I brought the prescription form to a pharmacy that I regularly get my mediations from, and they once again asserted that I had no documented medication allergies. I realized that if I had not been able to articulate the critical aspects my medical history to each individual between me and the medication in my hands, this situation could have gone south very quickly. Many more safeguards would have been in place if my official medical records could simply be accessed by the providers at this new clinic.

This was comparatively a very minor incident and I did not suffer any lasting consequences from the lack of effective HIE protocols in this situation. However, I am constantly troubled by the lack of continuous care experienced by my friends and family while navigating the U.S. healthcare system, and by the stories I hear about the intra and inter-institution communication failures that have disastrous consequences for patients. As I mentioned in my primer section, it seems like a “no-brainer” that health information should automatically be exchanged to ensure the safety and wellbeing of the public. The data ownership and market competition factors that often disincentivize organizations from sharing health information make me feel ashamed of how financially driven and commodified the U.S. healthcare system has become, and of how unwilling people can be to altruistically care for one another. However, I must also remind myself to be empathetic with those on the other end of the spectrum who need to make a living by cutting costs, retaining patients and owning valuable data. I might not like that the U.S. is an inherently individualistic and financially-driven society, but I understand that new policies and incentives will most likely be effective if they can operate within existing social and economic frameworks. It is my hope that with more cooperative communication among actors in the healthcare delivery network and with policies that encourage organizations to shift from a data ownership to a continuity of care perspective (as championed by HIMSS), HIE will soon become a standard in the field of healthcare.
