---
layout: post
title:  "Essential and frustrating"
date:   2019-04-20
author: Hannah
categories: reactions
---
After reading the chapters about healthcare cost and financing in “Understanding Health Policy” by Bodenheimer and Grumbach, I started to realize the complexity of reasons - historical, political, other otherwise - behind the current healthcare system failures. The system as it is today, including the state of the health insurance industry, the healthcare provider sector, and the medical technology industry, have evolved organically to be the way they are today because of many natural economic pressures. On multiple occasions, it was recognized that the system has taken an undesirable turn, and lawmakers and clinicians alike took action to improve healthcare quality and access while controlling costs. Unfortunately, each time a new rule or system component was put in place, new problems arose. Today, the United States is, in Bodenheimer and Grumbach’s words, a conundrum of “excess and deprivation”, where some subpopulations get too much care and others get too little. Bodenheimer and Grumbach’s discussion of other countries’ healthcare systems was enlightening, though the applicability of individual elements of these systems to the US system is not yet clear to me. For example, having a system that is entirely funded by taxes and covers everyone unconditionally - the so called universal, single payer healthcare system - sounds all well and good on paper, but would not find widespread support amongst Americans, at least today, and would therefore not be possible here. Additionally, some countries with excellent healthcare quality and access and reasonable costs, such as Germany, nevertheless have experienced soaring costs in recent years, indicating that the alternative systems we often idealize have plenty of problems of their own. To solve a problem as complex and as political as healthcare in the US, feasibility and acceptability are two of the most important factors that need to be considered.

For this assignment, I have focused on cost and financing, which is a topic that previously alluded and intrigued me. My personal goal is to come to a better understanding of how the system currently works and why, what’s wrong with it, and what can be done about it. I believe that this is critical for students in Biomedical and Health Informatics, who will likely be the future leaders in healthcare. Being able to think critically about the problems with our healthcare system and to weigh the proposed solutions is therefore essential. 

The primer project so far has been interesting yet frustrating to me. As I worked towards gaining an understanding that is comprehensive enough to decide what is “essential” and what is not, and how to explain these things to a hypothetical person with interest but without expertise, I continued to discover holes in my understanding. Finally, I decided to focus on only two pairs of opposing concepts that appear to be important to understanding cost and financing of healthcare: Community vs. experience rating and fee-for-service vs. global payment methods such as capitation and salary. I am not satisfied with how shallow and incomplete my tour through this very complex topic turned out to be, but I understand that a realistic scope had to be set for an assignment that should only take up a couple of weeks. I think there is much more to learn and I will continue to read and think about the US healthcare system throughout this course and the program.
