---
layout: post
title:  "AI and Course Reflections"
date:   2019-06-11
author: Harsh
categories: reactions
---

For the last reflection post, I thought I would share some thoughts on Artificial Intelligence, Grand Challenges, and what I thought of the course as a whole.

Beginning with AI, I think the in-class discussion and framing exercises were a great way to begin thinking about the history of AI in medicine, current developments, and what the future entails. Personally, I do not think we will have another AI winter, at least not to the same scale as the previous one. I think the advancements in computing, availability of big data, and new innovations in knowledge representations will "fuel" researchers through any potential winter that is to come. Tying in healthcare, there is and always has been a big push towards understanding the human condition, both mind and the body, and I think AI will help push us closer to that knowledge. With new image recognition tools and predictive analytics algorithms, we are able to recognize details that once evaded us and develop protocols and guidelines to act on these subtleties. Real-time monitoring of a large number of patients is suddenly available and the learning health system is knocking on the door. I think, as researchers, we are living in a great era to push the union of computers and healthcare further than ever before. Of course, with all things, it will be met with skepticism and justified resistance, especially from those who fear their livelihoods will be replaced, but with all change, I think the population will adapt and we will shift smaller responsibilities to automation while keeping the larger challenges to be solved in the hands of humans. Human-AI collaboration will also be a great discussion topic of the future and I look forward to seeing how legislation, public opinion, and researcher attitudes change as we move forward.

Moving on to Grand Challenges, I think the activity in class really helped open my eyes on what is needed to be solved and what is achievable in the next ten years. I do think that the learning health system, as described in class, is a realistic goal and a goal that we should strive to achieve as soon as possible. This ties well with the AI discussion above in that a learning health care system will allow for providers to focus more on quality of care by having a better understanding of what their patients are experiencing and tailoring clinical guidelines to allow for more personalized care. By doing so, healthcare costs are expected to decline, a reduction in errors is expected, and overall quality of care is projected to improve. Other grand challenges such as better global surveillance (via global internet or drones), better communication between patients and their providers, smart tracking of drug abuse, and better health information exchanges are also very important and also achievable given enough resources and collaboration between researchers, hospitals and clinics, insurance companies, and other healthcare entities.

Finally, I want to take some time to revisit the goals I had listed in my initial reflection post and see if they were satisfied throughout the course of the quarter. Coming in to the class, I did not know much about how the different actors of the healthcare industry worked together and how care was different in the various branches of healthcare. I think I was able to understand the actors a bit better during the EHR and Healthcare in the US discussions, specifically learning more on how insurance works and how information is represented and transferred. I also wanted to learn more about healthcare workflows. I think the discussion on information exchange, walkthrough of how potential errors arise, and conflict resolution discussions helped me fill in those gaps of knowledge. Lastly, I wanted to learn how AI will impact the future of medicine and the role researchers and doctors will play after successful implementation. I know we discussed the history of AI in medicine and some concerns that different actors hold with respect to AI implementation. I will have to do more reading and see AI in practice before really satisfying that goal. Overall, the course gave me a good primer on the world of clinical informatics, and I will continue to explore areas that spark my interest or areas that I think I can aid in improving.
