---
layout: post
title:  "Thoughts on CDS"
date:   2019-06-10
author: Hannah
categories: reactions
---
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning have seen a great resurgence in recent decades. They now have an amazing potential to improve clinical care and impact lives. With an amazing amount of EHR data, as well as other data such as sensor data and internet sources such as Twitter feeds, the possibilities are endless. It is especially amazing to me how much is already possible today with relatively straight-forward methods; oftentimes, the limiting factor is getting enough high quality data to train algorithms. 

Aside from the amazing opportunities for AI in medicine, for this chapter, I was also especially interested in the perceptions of AI by health care professionals and the public. Health professionals may push back on new technologies out of fear of being replaced by computers. I do think that this threat is real, at least for some professions: According to Obermeyer et al. (2016), “… ﻿machine learning will displace much of the work of radiologists and anatomical pathologists. These physicians focus largely on interpreting digitized images, which can easily be fed directly to algorithms instead. Massive imaging data sets, combined with recent advances in computer vision, will drive rapid improvements in performance, and machine accuracy will soon exceed that of humans. Indeed, radiology is already partway there: algorithms can replace a second radiologist reading mammograms and will soon exceed human accuracy.” In this context, I enjoyed the reframing activitiy, which brought up an interesting alternative frame: Rather than fearing that radiologists and pathologists being out of a job in the near future, and computer algorithms making our medical decisions, we should accept that professions evolve over time, and always have. For example, not too long ago, there were elevator operators, but with the advent of automatic elevators, this profession no longer exists. It's not like we have huge volumes of unemployed elevator operators now; rather, people no longer train for this specific role, and take on elevator maintenance instead - for which there is now an increased need, since elevators have evolved into more complex machinery - or train for other jobs that did not exist in the days of manually operated elevators. Jha and Topol explore the prospects of a new version of the radiology profession in a JAMA Viewpoint article titled "Adapting to Artificial Intelligence: Radiologists and Pathologists as Information Specialists". The roles of radiology and pathology professionals will evolve in the near future, but that doesn't mean that people will no longer be needed at all; on the contrary, we will need people with appropriate medical and computational expertise to manage and maintain the data and algorithms.

I personally see great potential in AI and Machine Learning to transform the way our society works - to make it more efficient and effective while improving health care for everyone by providing care professionals with the tools to get the job done. Changes will be needed to achieve this vision. But the fear of change should not hold us back. 

Obermeyer, Z., & Emanuel, E. J. (2016). Predicting the Future — Big Data, Machine Learning, and Clinical Medicine. New England Journal of Medicine, 375(13), 1216–1219. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMP1606181

Jha, S., & Topol, E. J. (2016). Adapting to Artificial Intelligence: Radiologists and Pathologists as Information Specialists. JAMA, 316(22), 2353. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.17438